# Math for Programmers

This tutorial contains practical math for programmers who want to get
stuff done, but also more stuff for people who get interested in how the
math works. It assumes that you have some experience with programming,
but you'll probably understand most of it without programming skills.

Start by opening [the basics page](basics.html) and keep it open while
you read the tutorial. There's nothing wrong with looking up things from
it as we go.

If you came here because you want to calculate some specific thing, go
to [the summary page](summary.html) to get a nice and concise list of
things that are shown in this tutorial.

If you don't know what to start with I recommend [the derivative
tutorial](derivatives.html). Derivatives are a great example of why I
like math; calculations that seem like they will be complicated turn out
to be surprisingly simple and doable in the end. After that, if you got
interested in how awesome the math is, continue to [the integral
tutorial](integrals.html) for more amazing stuff, and if you are still
interested you can also read [the more integrals chapter](more-integrals.html).
If you didn't get interested in derivatives but you read and understood
it you might still find integrals interesting.

If you're a game developer and you want to create 2D games with a
library that requires you to deal with coordinates, check out [the
geometry and trigonometry tutorial](geometry-and-trig.html). You'll find
it useful.

If you're wondering how color strings like ``#ff0000`` work, see
[the number theory chapter](numbertheory.html).

When you're done with reading everything you are interested in or you
just want to see more math for some reason, check out those parts of
[the explanation page](explanations.html) that relate to chapters that
you have read.
