# Infinity

This tutorial uses the symbol $\infty$ in a few places, and it's not at all
obvious how it behaves. It is after all bigger than any other number, and
that's kind of weird. Some mathematicians say that infinity is not a number at
all, and that's correct in a way because infinity behaves very differently than
finite numbers. This chapter contains many examples of that.

## Basic Calculations

graybox:
    Experienced mathematicians probably want me to mention that I'm talking
    about [the extended real number
    line](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Extended_real_number_line). There, I
    have mentioned it.

math:
    \infty + 5 = \infty

Yes, that's correct. If you add any finite number to $\infty$, you'll just get
$\infty$. You can think about it like this: if you have $\infty$ lines of code
and you write more code, you still have $\infty$ lines of code...

math:
    \infty - 5 = \infty

...or if you delete some code, you still have lots of code! In general,
$\infty + x = \infty$ for any finite $x$, even if $x$ is negative.

Here are more calculations:

math:
    \infty \cdot 5 &= \infty
    \frac \infty 5 &= \infty \cdot \frac 1 5 = \infty
    \infty \cdot (-5) &= -(\infty \cdot 5) = -\infty
    \frac{\infty}{-5} &= -\frac \infty 5 = -\infty

In general, if $x$ is finite, $\infty \cdot x = \infty$ if $x > 0$ and
$\infty \cdot x = -\infty$ if $x < 0$. We'll talk about $\infty \cdot 0$ in a
moment.

[Powers](basics.html#powers-and-square-root) of infinity behave like this:

math:
    \infty^4 = \infty \cdot \infty \cdot \infty \cdot \infty = \infty

This works with any positive exponent, like $\infty^{1/2} = \infty$ or even
$\infty^\infty = \infty$. [Later](explog.html#exponent-functions) we'll learn
that things like $x^{-4}$ can be defined as $\frac{1}{x^4}$, and that's why
$\infty^x = 0$ for a negative $x$.

Calculations with infinity can also yield a finite value.

math:
    \frac 1 \infty = 0

Or in general, for any finite $x$:

math:
    \frac x \infty = \frac 1 \infty \cdot x = 0 \cdot x = 0

## Limits with infinity

Let's say you want to know what happens to $x^2 - x$ if $x$ gets really big.
Sometimes you can just plug in $x=\infty$ and you'll find out. Let's see if
that works in our case.

math:
    \infty^2 - \infty = \infty - \infty

So, what is $\infty - \infty$? Maybe it's 0? Maybe it's $\infty$ or $-\infty$?
If we first rewrite things slightly and then plug in $x=\infty$ we get
something that makes more sense:

math:
    & x^2-x = (x-1)x
    & (\infty-1) \cdot \infty = \infty \cdot \infty = \infty

So if $x$ gets very big, $x^2 - x$ will also get very big. A mathy way to say
this is that the **limit** as $x$ goes to $\infty$ of $x^2 - x$ is $\infty$.

math:
    \lim_{x\to\infty} (x^2-x) = \lim_{x\to\infty} x(x-1) \
    = (\infty-1) \cdot \infty = \infty

Here $x\to\infty$ means "$x$ goes to infinity", or "$x$ approaches infinity" if
you like fancy words. It does **not** mean $x=\infty$, it means that we want to
know what happens if $x$ is very big. Practically this means that we can first
treat $x$ as a finite number and then plug in $\infty$.

## How about $\infty-\infty$ or $\infty/\infty$?

Based on the above stuff, you might be thinking that $\infty-\infty=\infty$,
but this limit gives something very different:

math:
    \lim_{x\to\infty}(x-x) = \lim_{x\to\infty}0 = 0

Or this:

math:
    \lim_{x\to\infty}(x-x^2) = \lim_{x\to\infty}x(1-x) = \infty\cdot(1-\infty) \
    = \infty\cdot(-\infty) = -\infty^2 = -\infty

As you can see, $\infty-\infty$ limits can output many different values. This
is why $\infty-\infty$ is **indeterminate**, and that fancy word means that the
value of an $\infty-\infty$ limit can be anything.

Most programming languages know this too:

code: python3
    >>> float('infinity') - float('infinity')
    nan

NaN is short for "Not a Number".

Here are some examples of other indeterminate things.

### $\displaystyle\frac\infty\infty$

indent:
    I'll [divide top and bottom](basics.html#divide-top-and-bottom) by $x$ in
    these examples. If you try to do e.g. $\frac{\infty}{2\infty}$ you get
    $\frac \infty \infty$.

    math: \lim_{x\to\infty} \frac{x}{2x} = \lim_{x\to\infty} \frac 1 2 = \frac 1 2

    math: \lim_{x\to\infty} \frac{2x}{x} = \lim_{x\to\infty} \frac 2 1 = \frac 2 1 = 2

    Here's a fun way to think about this, taken from a comment on [this
    question](https://math.stackexchange.com/q/181304):

    math:
        \frac{1+1+1+...}{2+2+2+...}=\frac{(1+1)+(1+1)+...}{2+2+2+2+...}=\frac{2+2+2+...}{2+2+2+...}

### $\displaystyle\frac 0 0$

indent:
    See [this video](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=BRRolKTlF6Q).

### $0 \cdot \infty$

indent:
    This one is interesting because 0 multiplied by anything finite is 0, and
    infinity multiplied by anything nonzero is either $\infty$ or $-\infty$
    (see above).

    math:
        \lim_{x\to\infty}(0 \cdot x) = 0

    math:
        \lim_{x\to\infty} \biggl(\ \underbrace{\frac 1 x}_{\to0}\
        \cdot \overbrace{x}^{\to\infty}\ \biggr) \
        = \lim_{x\to\infty} \frac x x = \lim_{x\to\infty} 1 = 1

    math:
        \lim_{x\to\infty} \biggl(\ \underbrace{\frac 1 x}_{\to0} \
        \cdot \overbrace{x^2}^{\to\infty}\  \biggr)\
        = \lim_{x\to\infty} \frac{x^2}{x} = \lim_{x\to\infty} \frac x 1 = \frac \infty 1 = \infty

### $1^\infty$

indent:
    You might be thinking that it makes sense to define $1^\infty = 1$ because
    $1^x=1$ for any finite $x$ (multiplying 1 by itself $x$ times is still 1).
    Even though this limit is 1...

    math:
        \lim_{x\to\infty}1^x = \lim_{x\to\infty} 1 = 1

    ...it doesn't mean that all $1^\infty$ limits are 1. Here's a famous
    example that we'll revisit [later](explog.html#the-e-constant):

    math:
        e = \lim_{n\to\infty} \left(1+\frac 1 n\right)^n = 2.718281828459...

    Mathematicians call this number $e$. The inside of the limit goes to 1
    because $\displaystyle\lim_{n\to\infty}\textstyle(1+\frac 1 n)=1+0=1$, but
    the whole thing does not go to 1. Just try this with your favorite
    programming language or calculator:

    code: python3
        >>> n = 10000000000
        >>> (1 + 1/n)**n
        2.7182820532347876
        >>> import math
        >>> math.e
        2.718281828459045

    Here are more $1^\infty$ limits:

    math:
        \lim_{n\to\infty} \left(1+\frac 1 n\right)^{2n} \
        = \lim_{n\to\infty} \Biggl(\left(1+\frac 1 n\right)^n\Biggr)^2 \
        = e^2 = 7.389055...

    math:
        \lim_{n\to\infty} \left(1+\frac 1 n\right)^{n\ \cdot\ n} \
        = \lim_{n\to\infty} \Biggl(\left(1+\frac 1 n\right)^n\Biggr)^n \
        = e^\infty = \infty

### $0^0$

indent:
    Let's start by thinking about what $x^0$ is with a finite $x$. We know that
    $x^{a+b}=x^ax^b$ (see [the basics page](basics.html#powers-and-square-root)),
    so we can plug in e.g. $a=1$ and $b=0$:

    math:
        x^{1+0} &= x^1x^0
        x &= x \cdot x^0

    This is true if $x=0$, and if $x \ne 0$, we can divide by $x$ on both sides
    to get $1=x^0$. So here's our conclusion: $x^0=1$ for any finite $x$ except
    $x=0$ and we know nothing about $0^0$ yet.

    On the other hand, $0^x=0$ with any finite $x$, so we get these limits:

    math:
        & \lim_{x\to0} 0^x = 0
        & \lim_{x\to0} x^0 = 1

### $\infty^0$

indent:
    We just learned that $x^0=1$ with any finite $x$...

    math:
        \lim_{x\to\infty}x^0=1

    ...but we also have $\infty^x=\infty$ for any positive $x$...

    math:
        \lim_{x\to0^+}\infty^x = \infty

    ...and $\infty^x=0$ for a negative $x$:

    math:
        \lim_{x\to0^-}\infty^x = 0

    Here $x\to0^+$ means that $x$ goes to 0 from the positive side; that is, we
    want to know what happens if $x$ is something like $0.00000001$. Similarly,
    $x\to0^-$ means approaching from the negative side. A plain $x\to0$ means
    that approaching from either side gives the same value. As a special case,
    $x\to\infty$ means $x\to\infty^-$ because it's not possible to approach
    $\infty$ from the positive side.
